WIP Press Release - FAQ (#120)
near/bos-web-engine: press-release-faq.md

# Vision PR/FAQ

> ⚠️ This is a mock press release / FAQ for the eventual launch of BWE, it does not necessarily represent
the current state of the project and the contents here may change during the course of implementation.
It is used for communicating the vision of the project and maintaining alignment on the criteria for success.

## Press Release

> Pagoda is proud to announce the production release of the BOS Web Engine (BWE).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pagoda makes major enhancements to BOS decentralized front-end development with the release of BOS Web Engine (BWE).
```

BWE is the new execution environment for BOS components which offers a more reliable security guarantee and
enables modern web development features which have previously been missing like npm dependencies, TypeScript,
and hooks— along with advanced features for performance optimizations.

> Until now, BOS components have been written to be compatible with the "VM". This VM processes components line
> by line and executes statements only if it has been built to understand them and knows them to be safe. It
> relies on this restrictive processing for security. This model creates a constant tug of war between expanding the
> capability of BOS components and maintaining security. Importing code which expects to execute in a typical
> browser environment is not possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Until now, BOS components required compatibility with [near-social's VM](https://github.com/nearsocial/vm). This VM operates on a stringent security protocol that meticulously scrutinizes components line-by-line, and only executes statements when they are recognized, understood, and confirmed to be secure. Unfortunately, this model leads to a persistent balancing act between enhancing the functionality of BOS components and ensuring their security. As a result, importing code that expects to execute in a typical browser environment is impossible.
```

> In contrast, BWE leverages the sandboxing configuration of iframes built into browsers to isolate the execution
> of each component. Each component's code is passed to an invisible iframe along with an instance of Preact. Preact
> executes the components and the rendered output is serialized and passed out of the iframe. Then, the output of all
> the iframes is composed together into a single tree for render on the page. One way to think of this is that each
> component is run as its own isolated applet and given a messaging system to integrate with other components. This
> allows being significantly less restrictive with the code a component can run, since the only surface of exposure
> to the OWA is DOM nodes. It also means code written for a standard browser or Preact environment can be imported
> and run by components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BWE takes an alternative approach by leveraging the inherent sandboxing feature of iframes in web browsers to isolate the execution of each component.

Here's how it works:

- Code for each component is sent to a hidden iframe, accompanied by an instance of [Preact](https://preactjs.com/), a lightweight JavaScript library for building user interfaces.
- Within this iframe, Preact executes the component's code, and once rendered, the output is systematically converted into a secure format that is transferred out of the iframe.
- The outputs from all iframes are then meticulously assembled into one unified structure, ready to be displayed on the webpage.

Imagine each component operating as a self-contained mini-application, complete with its own communication system to synchronize with other components. This architecture allows for significantly fewer restrictions with code components that can execute since the only interaction point with the main web application is the DOM nodes. Additionally, code designed for standard browsers or Preact can be seamlessly imported and executed within these components.
```

## F.A.Q

### General

> #### When will the previous VM stop being supported?

Reviewer: As we discussed, we need to sync with Eugene to determine if near.social and bos.gg plan to migrate with near.org. If not, the VM will continue to be supported in parallel with BWE.

After the grace period, the VM will be deprecated and removed from the BOS runtime, since the security
guarantees it provides are not sufficient for the future of BOS.

### Building BOS Components with BWE

#### What language and framework are BOS components written in?

BOS components are written in TypeScript or JavaScript and use Preact as the rendering engine with the React compatibility layer enabled.
One of the main goals of BWE is to have syntax that is minimally different from vanilla (p)react, and only stray from it where
necessary to accomodate the architecture of the engine and sandbox communication patterns.

See [components.md](components.md) for a detailed overview of the syntax required to build BOS components.

#### What non-BOS code can I import?

You can import npm packages via a CDN like https://esm.sh/

You can expect for packages which are not dependent on direct access to the DOM or `window` object to work out of
the box. Many packages which export custom React components are also supported due to our inclusion of preact/compat
in the sandboxed environment.

> Packages which may not work:

Reviewer: Maybe we should mention that this will not be supported by default but _could_ be supported in the future.

Author: yeah, intentionally leaving this a bit vague for right now since we don't know what's possible
